Research Paper
A comprehensive method for exploratory data analysis and preprocessing 
the ASHRAE database for machine learning
Amir Rahmanparast
a
, Muhammed Milani
b
, Muhammet Camci
c , d , *
, Yakup Karakoyun
e
,  
Ozgen Acikgoz
a
, Ahmet Selim Dalkilic
a
a
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering Faculty, Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul 34349, Turkiye
b
Department of Computer Sciences, Engineering and Natural Sciences Faculty, Bandirma Onyedi Eylul University, Bandirma 10200, Turkiye
c
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Siirt University, Siirt 56100, Turkiye
d
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Faculty, King Mongkut ’ s University of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT), Bangkok 10140, Thailand
e
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Van Yuzuncu Yil University, Van 65080, Turkiye
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Random forest
SHAP
ASHRAE Global thermal comfort database
PMV
Thermal comfort
Machine learning
ABSTRACT
Thermal comfort prediction is crucial for building energy efficiency and occupant comfort. ML methods are 
commonly used to predict thermal comfort. This research presents a comprehensive process for exploring and 
preprocessing the ASHRAE Database, providing a substantial dataset comprising 107,583 records of thermal 
comfort observations to create ML algorithms that can estimate Fanger ’ s PMV. With the most detailed cleaning 
and preprocessing stages in the literature, which included the imputation of missing values and the management 
of outliers, the final dataset is reduced to 55,443 records for the analyses. For practical applications and indoor 
comfort assessments, its estimation offers significant advantages due to its speed, ease of use, and cost- 
effectiveness. This study aimed to investigate which parameters are important in Fanger ’ s PMV model and 
which subset of variables is best for variable selection using different feature selection and analysis methods. The 
T
a 
and T
r 
had a high correlation value of 0.92, indicating a robust link between these two variables. The study 
employed Feature importance, the SelectKBest, SHAP, P-box, and PDP analyses, which showed consistency and 
suggested condensing the first six elements into three, and also was validated with the Chinese Database with 
41,977 entries. The study targeted three parameters: T
a
, clo, and M, using less expensive and simple measure -
ment devices. To evaluate the accuracy of the research performance, RF and SVM models were created based on 
these three parameters. The results indicated that they have the accuracies of 85% and 70%, respectively, which 
are far better than the conventional models.
1. Introduction
Forecasting thermal comfort is essential for enhancing energy effi -
ciency in structures and safeguarding occupant well-being. Although 
machine learning (ML) approaches are widely employed to forecast 
thermal comfort, these models frequently encounter difficulties in real- 
time adaptation, particularly in the regulation of heating, ventilating, 
and air conditioning systems (HVAC). Elements include age, environ -
mental factors, and individual comfort judgments that exacerbate the 
difficulty.
As interest in data-driven models grows, more complex algorithms 
are being used to predict thermal comfort, which has a wide range of 
input parameters. However, these developed models may not always be 
suitable for real-time applications, such as the instant control of HVAC. 
The difficulty of accurately estimating thermal comfort in buildings is 
compounded by the complex interactions between various influencing 
factors. Traditional HVAC systems often fail to account for real-time 
changes in occupancy and external conditions. As smart buildings 
become more common over time, there is a growing demand for energy- 
efficient HVAC solutions aiming both to maintain comfort and to reduce 
energy consumption. The ASHRAE RP-884 [ 1 ] database plays a key role 
in informing standards like ISO 7730 [ 2 ] and ASHRAE 55 [ 3 ], but cur -
rent models still face limitations in their ability to adapt. Therefore, it 
can be said that there is a need for more advanced, responsive thermal 
comfort prediction systems.
ML techniques have become a fundamental element in the devel -
opment of thermal comfort prediction systems. Despite this, thermal 
* Corresponding author at: Department of Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Siirt University, Siirt 56100, Turkiye.
E-mail address: mcamci@siirt.edu.tr (M. Camci). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Thermal Engineering
journal homepag e: www.el sevier.com/loc ate/aptherm eng
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2025.126556
Received 15 November 2024; Received in revised form 22 March 2025; Accepted 21 April 2025  
Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
Available online 21 April 2025 
1359-4311/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
comfort remains a subjective experience influenced by numerous fac -
tors, including environmental conditions and physiological data, which 
can be different from person to person in terms of age, gender, race, 
habits, and activity. Numerous ML-based models concentrate on a single 
aspect of thermal comfort, which can lead to conflicting predictions 
when multiple factors are considered. This matter is especially critical 
for at-risk groups, such as the elderly, whose heat perception may alter 
with age, possibly resulting in severe health hazards such as hypo- and 
hyperthermia.
Dear’s ASHRAE Research Project 884 [ 1 ] focused on adaptive ther -
mal comfort, involving nearly 21,000 sets of raw thermal comfort data 
from research groups worldwide. The data underwent cleaning and 
standardization processes before being incorporated into a database. 
Thermal comfort indicators were re-calculated implementing ASHRAE- 
sponsored software, and clothing insulation (clo) values were converted 
to ASHRAE 55. The database has potential uses beyond adaptive thermal 
comfort modeling, such as developing empirical thermal indices and 
validating laboratory-based comfort models and standards. Accessible 
through a World Wide Web website, the database is now in the public 
domain in various formats. The ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort 
Database II [ 4 ] project, initiated in 2014, aims to advance HVAC science 
and art by utilizing open-source research resources. The database, which 
contains 81,846 objective indoor climate observations and subjective 
assessments of building occupants, is designed to help with various 
questions about thermal comfort in field settings. Its web-based interface 
allows users to filter on criteria such as building typology, occupancy 
type, demographic variables, indoor thermal environmental criteria, 
calculated comfort indices, environmental control criteria, and outdoor 
meteorological data.
The literature review below summarizes previous research and 
points out research gaps. It does this by comparing existing works in a 
structured way and making a clear statement about unresolved problems 
to strengthen the study’s justification. Farhan et al. [ 5 ] proposed a new 
ML method for determining a person’s thermal comfort profile. They use 
a feature vector to identify the optimal feature set and train a classifier to 
provide a thermal sensation class. The method’s accuracy is 76.7 %, two 
times greater than the widely used Fanger’s model [ 6 ], which only 
achieves 35.4 %. The research also suggests that an individual’s age and 
outside temperature, which Fanger’s model [ 6 ] does not consider, 
significantly impact thermal comfort. Lu et al. [ 7 ] have extensively 
studied thermal comfort theory, focusing on both static and adaptive 
models. Adaptive thermal comfort emphasizes interactions between 
occupants and the indoor environment using data-driven methods. The 
ASHRAE RP884 dataset is a key achievement in this area. This study 
purposes to construct a thermal comfort model implementing RP 884 of 
the three main climate zones and simulate a tabular Q-learning tem -
perature set-point control system. The numerical thermal comfort model 
has the best recall at 49.3 %, outperforming predicted mean vote 
(PMV)’s 43 %. Q-learning-based temperature control can bring occu -
pants’ comfort levels within reasonable bounds. According to Parkinson 
et al. [ 8 ], the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort collection II has released 
a quality assurance exercise on the first generation of adaptive comfort 
standards. The study validated the adaptive comfort model for naturally 
ventilated buildings using 60,321 comfort questionnaire records and 
measurement data. The results suggest future improvements to the 
standards, adaptive comfort theory, and building operating techniques. 
The study found that adaptive comfort mechanisms apply to all building 
occupants, as thermal environmental exposures drive indoor adaptation. 
This presents an opportunity for integrating air conditioning practices 
into an adaptive framework through set-point nudging in building 
automation systems. Wang et al.’s [ 9 ] study used the ASHRAE Global 
Thermal Comfort Database II to assess thermal comfort in buildings. The 
most common measures include thermal sensation, thermal preference, 
comfort, and acceptability. The study suggests that personal experience 
of thermal conditions in the built environment should be included in 
surveys. Logistic regression and Support vector machines (SVM) were 
used to predict thermal acceptability and preference with thermal 
feeling and comfort. The results provide insights into selecting subjec -
tive thermal metrics for efficient data collection on occupants’ thermal 
experience, which could aid in designing field research, chamber ex -
periments, and human-building interaction interfaces. Luo et al. [ 10 ] 
used three data sampling techniques and nine ML algorithms to predict 
thermal sensation votes in the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Data -
base II. Random Forest (RF) performed the best, with an accuracy of 
66.3 % and 61.1 % for 3-point and 7-point votes, correspondingly. ML 
algorithms are typically more accurate than the PMV model. The top six 
crucial features for thermal sensation votes prediction are age, meta -
bolic rate (M), clo, air velocity (V
a
), relative humidity (RH), and air 
temperature (T
a
). RF can predict thermal sensation votes with an overall 
accuracy of 63.6 %, just 2.6 % less accurate than using 12 input features. 
The study also discussed issues like splitting training and testing data, 
encoding techniques, and hyperparameter tweaking in ML comfort 
models. Zhou et al. [ 11 ] developed a self-correcting model using the RP- 
884 thermal comfort database and support vector machine technique. 
The model, which uses variables like V
a
, garment insulation, M, and T
a
, 
significantly reduced inaccurate results and improved the fitting degree 
by 83.7 % and the sum of squares for residuals by 96.4 % compared to 
the PMV model. The model can distinguish between thermal comfort 
comebacks in natural ventilation and air-conditioning systems, elimi -
nating the need for separate models. An open-access platform was 
created to help use ML algorithms for thermal comfort data study. Gao 
et al. [ 12 ] proposed DeepComfort, a deep reinforcement learning-based 
system for controlling thermal comfort in buildings. They propose a 
cost-minimization problem considering both HVAC system energy con -
sumption and occupant comfort. They present a deep deterministic 
policy gradient-based approach for optimal thermal comfort manage -
ment and a deep feedforward neural network-based approach for 
occupant thermal comfort forecasting. They tested their method in a 
simulation environment and found that it can increase thermal comfort 
prediction performance by 14.5 %, lower HVAC energy consumption by 
4.31 %, and increase occupant thermal comfort by 13.6 %. According to 
the study of Ma et al. [ 13 ], thermal comfort is a critical aspect of indoor 
environments, influenced by both known and unquantifiable factors. A 
predictive model for occupant thermal preference was created using a 
Bayesian neural network (BNN) algorithm, combining measurements 
and past knowledge. The BNN model outperformed traditional models 
like the adaptive comfort model and PMV but predicted less accurately. 
Nomenclature
ASHRAE 55 American society of heating, refrigerating and air- 
conditioning engineers
BNN Bayesian neural network
clo Clothing insulation
EDA Exploratory data analysis
HVAC Heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems
ISO EN 7730 International standard
M Metabolic rate, (W/m
2
)
ML Machine learning
PDP Partial dependence plots
PMV Predicted mean vote
PPD Percentage people dissatisfied
RF Random Forest
RH Relative humidity, (%)
SVM Support vector machines
T
a
Air temperature, (℃)
T
g
Globe temperature, (℃)
T
r
Mean radiant temperature, (℃)
V
a
Air velocity, (m/s)
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
2 
The study suggests that integrating window opening/closing behavior 
and subjective evaluation measures with thermal comfort models can 
enhance predictive performance. Overall, thermal comfort is a critical 
aspect of indoor comfort. Park and Park [ 14 ] developed a prediction 
model for personal thermal comfort using ensemble transfer learning to 
overcome challenges in collecting individual features. Wearable wrist -
bands and sensors were used to gather physiological and environmental 
data, and a pre-trained model was created using deep learning and ML 
methods. The ensemble transfer learning approach improved the accu -
racy of predicting thermal comfort for two target participants, with 95 % 
accuracy and an F1 score for the first subject and 85 % and 83 % for the 
second subject, respectively. Lala et al. ’ s [ 15 ] study used multitask 
learning to predict thermal comfort in elementary school classrooms. 
512 students participated in tests, and DeepComfort, a deep learning 
model, was suggested. Tested on the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort 
database II and dataset, DeepComfort showed good F1 scores, accuracy 
(around 90 %), and generalization ability. It performed better than six 
popular metric-specific single-task ML methods, marking the first time 
multitask learning was used in a classroom. Bai et al. [ 16 ] conducted a 
study on the performance of 10 ML models, including traditional and 
ensemble models, in predicting building occupants ’ thermal comfort. 
The models were trained using ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort 
Database II features and analyzed using RF and gradient boosting de -
cision trees. Ensemble models showed the most significant improve -
ment, reaching 40 % to 60 % during training. RF and deep cascade forest 
models also showed significant benefits in predicting thermal prefer -
ences, offering guidelines for automated thermal environment control in 
buildings. Lan et al. ’ s study [ 17 ] utilized the ASHRAE Global Thermal 
Comfort Database II to analyze thermal comfort in classrooms. The study 
identified eleven key factors influencing comfort, using a hybrid model 
combining Bayesian optimization and extreme gradient boosting. The 
findings revealed 80 % of impacts and 20 % of interacting effects, with 
some interactive effects being stronger than the main ones. The study 
aimed to develop a more robust personal comfort model to guide HVAC 
design and regulation development for thermal environment and 
energy-saving needs. Feng et al. [ 18 ] developed an ML method to 
accurately project building occupants ’ thermal comfort levels using the 
ASHRAE RP-884 database. They pre-processed the dataset using an 
imputation method and selected relevant input characteristics using the 
Relif algorithm. Four ensemble models were developed to assess the 
connection between thermal comfort levels and input features. A 
decision-making method was used to assess the credibility of each esti -
mator, and the final PMV was obtained using Genetic Algorithm opti -
mized coefficients. The results showed promising results with a low Root 
Mean Squared Error value of 0.157. Lamberti et al. [ 19 ] developed a 
data-driven model using 61,710 subjective reactions from field study 
environmental characteristics stored in two ASHRAE databases. The 
model produced two simpler and moreaccurate models, which improved 
prediction compared to PMV and other regression models. The models 
determined comfort areas at 90 %, 80 %, and 70 % of thermal accept -
ability, indicating that the prediction error is below the 90 % allowable 
range. These models enable occupant-centered HVAC control and 
thermal comfort estimations, allowing for more adaptable building 
management standards that lower energy consumption without 
compromising interior comfort. Yang et al. [ 20 ] analyzed data from the 
ASHRAE RP-884 and the Chinese Thermal Comfort Database to under -
stand indoor thermal environment characteristics in China. They found 
significant differences between China and the global database. The 
Chinese population showed greater adaptability, with 80 % acceptable 
temperature ranges in cooled buildings, 15.99 
◦
C to 27.26 
◦
C in heated 
buildings, and 15.69 
◦
C to 30.78 
◦
C in naturally ventilated buildings. A 
thermal adaptation model was developed based on the Chinese Thermal 
Comfort Database for China ’ s naturally ventilated structures. Park and 
Woo [ 21 ] presented a method to minimize the dimensionality of factors 
for PMV prediction using ML, aiming to facilitate rapid PMV computa -
tions without sacrificing predictive accuracy. This study identified the 
most significant characteristics for PMV using PCA, Best Subset, and Gini 
Importance, comparing each model against the others. The findings 
indicated that PCA and ANN attained the best accuracy of 89.70 %, 
while the combination of Best Subset and RF exhibited the most rapid 
prediction performance overall.
Some recent research has focused on data cleaning and processing for 
ML applications using the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database II 
[ 4 ]. Based on the provided literature above, which used the ASHRAE 
databases and implemented ML techniques, this study is necessary 
because it can reduce the number of input variables required for 
calculation, which reduces the amount of measurement equipment that 
needs to be set up. This paper discusses the best way to select features for 
Fanger ’ s PMV [ 6 ] estimation, which can help in building a derived PMV 
estimation model. In addition to this, our literature review, as presented 
in Table 1 , indicates that aside from Park and Woo ’ s study [ 21 ], which 
achieved 89.7 % accuracy with 25,261 reduced data entries and three 
thermal comfort parameters requiring costly measurement equipment, 
no other study approaches our 85 % accuracy derived from 55,443 data 
entries utilizing three cost-effective thermal comfort parameters from 
the ASHRAE Database. In this context, the proposed ML-based feature 
selection and estimation techniques may be used to reduce the number 
of PMV parameters.
With comprehensive data collection, some preprocessing, including 
careful data analysis and preparation, is crucial to ensure the accuracy 
and reliability of ML models. To the best of the authors ’ knowledge, the 
literature review above indicates that no ML study has a more detailed 
data analysis and preprocessing than the one presented. The dataset is 
optimized for future modeling by thoroughly analyzing its structure, 
identifying patterns, and correcting issues such as missing data and 
anomalies. This strategy involves performing Exploratory Data Analysis 
(EDA) [ 22 ], understanding distributions, multicollinearity reduction, 
and using data cleaning methods such as standardization and coding. 
Furthermore, this study highlights the valid environmental parameters 
by filtering and carefully transforming the data, thus improving the 
quality and efficiency of thermal comfort prediction models. These 
strategies provide a robust framework for the model-building process 
that delivers reliable and significant results.
On the other hand, thermal comfort prediction is essential for 
improving energy efficiency in buildings and protecting occupant well- 
being. Although ML approaches are often used to predict thermal 
comfort, these models often face difficulties in real-time adaptation, 
especially in the regulation of HVAC systems. Factors such as age, 
environmental conditions, and individual comfort assessment exacer -
bate this problem. In reality, many metrics are difficult to measure, but 
in environments where thermal comfort is compromised, such as kin -
dergartens or areas with multiple age groups/conditions, it becomes 
impossible. Therefore, it is believed that the method presented in the 
current study, which shows that PMV can be predicted with fewer fac -
tors, can offer advantages in terms of usability and cost. In this study, 
several methods showed consistency and suggested decreasing the six 
conventional thermal comfort elements to a smaller number of critical 
ones. In simple terms, in complex environments where many parameters 
are involved in determining thermal comfort, eliminating some of the 
less influential variables can significantly increase the efficiency of the 
system.
The study utilized Feature Importance, the SelectKBest, SHapley 
Additive ExPlanations (SHAP), Probability boxes (P-box), and Partial 
Dependence Plots (PDP) analyses, which demonstrated consistency and 
indicated the reduction of the first six elements into three. The research 
focused on three elements: T
a
, clo, and M, employing cost-effective and 
straightforward measuring instruments. The aim of this study is to 
predict indoor thermal comfort as explained above using ML models 
developed from a reduced set of parameters in the related database. To 
evaluate the precision of the research performance, RF and SVM models 
were developed based on these three. Finally, ML-based models have 
high accuracy, but their limited interpretability usually causes problems 
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
3 
in practice due to the use of insufficient amounts of data. This study 
provides a comprehensive method for EDA and preprocessing in the 
ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database, which contains 107,583 
data entries, to enhance the accuracy of ML applications in predicting 
thermal comfort.
2. Data analysis and preprocessing
Data analysis and preprocessing are the most important parts of an 
ML pipeline because they highly affect the performance and reliability of 
the predictive model. At this stage, the dataset structure, the in -
terrelations among variables, and any intrinsic patterns that may in -
fluence the model ’ s accuracy are examined thoroughly. The data ’ s 
essential qualities, such as primary trends, variances, and in -
terrelationships among aspects, may be discerned from these. Further -
more, this procedure may reveal possible flaws, such as 
multicollinearity, class imbalance, and anomalies that might possibly 
impair the model ’ s predictions. As the raw data flows through the sys -
tem, it preprocesses it. It guarantees that the dataset is fit for the 
modeling phase and of very great quality. Normalizing, encoding cate -
gorical variables, and imputation of missing values are among pre -
processing methods.
This study proceeded through the following steps: Data Preparation 
and Analysis (In the first phase of the research, 107,583 data points were 
examined from the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database. Missing 
data were calculated and processed for outliers accordingly. Feature 
Selection (Using methods such as feature importance, SelectKBest, 
SHAP, P-box, and PDP analyses, the most relevant features were selected 
to predict the PMV value. The obtained parameters were tried on two 
models and good results were obtained. After checking with SHAP and 
PDP analyses, the model with the highest accuracy score was chosen as a 
good candidate to guess the PMV. The accuracy of the prediction was 
measured by the R
2 
value. HVAC systems can utilize these models to 
enhance thermal comfort and boost energy efficiency.
2.1. Data definition
The dataset [ 1 , 4 ] being analyzed consists of 107,583 data points, 
specifically aimed at predicting the PMV, a critical indicator of thermal 
comfort. The variables that affect this forecast include clo, M, T
a
, Mean 
radiant temperature (T
r
), RH, and V
a
. This phase conducts a thorough 
analysis of the dataset, identifying significant patterns and potential 
issues like missing data and outliers that require resolution before 
building a reliable model. Table 2 presents a comprehensive summary of 
the dataset, encompassing the total number of observations, the pro -
portion of missing data, and summary statistics for each variable.
This dataset outlines numerous environmental and personal factors 
that contribute to the prediction of PMV. However, there are several 
challenges that the model needs to deal with prior to its development. 
The presence of large proportions of missing data within the ASHRAE 
dataset is of great importance, particularly for factors such as T
r
, which 
have a 70 % missing rate. This could potentially affect the reliability of 
the model. Besides, the existence of outliers in some variables such as T
a 
and V
a 
imply potential errors in data entry or a unique condition during 
data collection, necessitating careful consideration during data pre -
processing. Other than those two, the other data appears to be generally 
consistent, with most variables showing moderate variability around 
their means. Proper handling of missing data and outliers is critical for 
the path to an accurate and robust PMV prediction model.
2.2. Exploratory data analysis
EDA is an initial, essential step in the data science process that leads 
to a profound understanding of structure, patterns, and possible anom -
alies residing in data. In this step, one tries to summarize the main 
features and results of the data using various statistical and visualization 
techniques, primarily graphical means [ 22 ]. EDA not only aids in the 
identification of trends and relationships between variables, but it is also 
critical for uncovering latent patterns, outliers, and potential biases that 
can jeopardize an analysis ’ s conclusions. Through iterative exploration 
Table 1 
Accuracies of some ML works using the ASHRAE Dataset for thermal comfort predictions.
Researcher Inputs Outputs Methods Dataset Data 
number
Accuracy (%), R
2 
( ¡ )
The current 
study
clo, M, T
a
PMV RF, 
SVM
ASHRAE II 55,443 85 % for RF 
70 % for SVM
Park & Woo 
[ 21 ]
clo, M, T
g
PMV ANN, LSTM, RF ASHRAE II 25,261 ANN: PCA: 89.70 %; Best Subset: 
88.96 %; Gini Importance: 87.83 %
Lu et al. [ 7 ] Environmental parameters like T
a
, T
out
, V
a
, 
RH, T
r
, clo, M, etc.
TSV KNN, RF, SVM ASHRAE 
RP884
5576 KNN 49.3 % 
SVM 48.7 % 
RF 48.7 %
Farhan et al. 
[ 5 ]
T
a
, V
a
, RH, T
r
, clo, M TCV Deep NN ASHRAE 
RP884
11,164 MSE is 1.16
Wang et al. 
[ 9 ]
Subjective thermal comfort vote (TPV, TSV, 
PMV, TAV, AMV, AMP)
TCV, 
TPV
LR, SVM ASHRAE II 16,795 TCV 64 % 
TPV 87 % 
Luo et al. [ 10 ] T
a
, V
a
, RH, SET, clo, M, Age, Sex, T
out
, Season, 
Operation mode, building type, etc
TSV LR, NB, ANN, KNN, AB, 
DT, GBM, RF, SVM
ASHRAE II 10,618 3 Point 60 – 66 % 
7 Point 52 – 57 %
Ma et al. [ 11 ] T
a
, T
r
, T
out
, T
op
, RH, RH
out
, V
a
, clo, M, Weight, 
Age, Operation mode, etc.
TPV BNN ASHRAE II 78,113 0.693
Table 2 
Preliminary analyses of the raw ASHRAE Database having 107,583 data entries for the cleaning process of the modified ASHRAE Database.
Variable Data Number Missing (%) Mean Std. Dev. Min 25th Percentile Median 75th Percentile Max
PMV 66,734 38.0 % 0.14 0.94   3.0   0.4 0.1 0.66 3.0
T
a
99,911 7.1 % 24.50 3.78 0.6 22.3 23.9 26.4 63.2
RH 97,762 9.1 % 47.55 15.76 0.0 35.3 47.2 59.4 100.0
T
r
32,473 70.0 % 24.60 4.26 1.2 22.4 24.0 27.0 148.1
V
a
89,892 16.4 % 0.18 0.41 0.0 0.04 0.09 0.19 56.17
clo 99,663 7.4 % 0.67 0.29 0.0 0.49 0.63 0.78 2.89
M 90,419 16.0 % 1.21 0.25 0.65 1.06 1.20 1.20 6.83
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
4 
with EDA, important insights will emerge, providing guidance on the 
selection of the most appropriate ML algorithms, thereby building pre -
dictive models in this data that are both accurate and robust.
2.2.1. Distribution analysis
Descriptive statistics includes distribution analysis, which aids in 
comprehending the distribution of each variable within the dataset. 
Each feature ’ s distribution will allow us to derive or identify key mea -
sures of central tendency, spread, and shape of our data, important for 
selecting suitable statistical methods and ML models. It is often drawn- 
out histograms, along with box plots and density plots, to visualize the 
frequency and variability of data points. Analyzing the type of distri -
bution reveals that skewness, kurtosis, or the presence of outliers 
significantly impacts the outcome of prediction models. Therefore, it 
provides a fundamental understanding that aids in future data pre -
processing and modeling strategies.
Importance of thermal comfort elements such as age, individual heat 
sensitivity, and subjective variables are known in the literature. The 
ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database includes these parameters. 
However, when the issue is about the derivation of PMV, the well-known 
formula by Fanger [ 6 ] does not include them. In addition, reduction of 
the six parameters to three, excluding occupant feedback loops (self- 
reported comfort levels) originally integrated into real-time predictive 
adjustments has been performed in the current work. Finally, it is proved 
that the use of three parameters was enough for the accuracy of ML 
models ’ predictions of PMV. These other personal or subjective traits 
above were left out of the model, as well as most of the occupant feed -
back loops, in other words, self-reported comfort levels. This is because 
the goal of this study is to make the complex inputs used by Fanger in the 
PMV formula [ 6 ] predictable using only a few basic variables, such as T
a
, 
clo, and M. The integration of feedback loops into real-time predictive 
adjustments, or more specifically, subjective personal factors, is the 
primary cause of inconsistencies in the ASHRAE Database. This is due to 
the subjective nature of individual decisions, which are influenced by 
their character and daily mood. Although metabolic activity can give 
some information about a person, inclusion of things that aren ’ t easily 
observable, like age or sensitivity, has not been taken in to consider -
ation, because they would have made the developed current method too 
complicated and had to be left out of this study. Conversely, addressing 
user feedback mechanisms, such as self-reported comfort levels, will 
undoubtedly be a vital future step in the context of real-time adaptation 
and tailored comfort requirements in building automation. Incorpo -
rating user input to improve instantaneous PMV estimations might boost 
predictions and facilitate the development of tailored comfort solutions. 
Therefore, it was preferred to be better to leave out the subjective or 
demographic variables from the integration. This is because the goal of 
the study is to simplify Fanger ’ s formula ’ s [ 6 ] large number of input 
measurements and reduce the number of variables while keeping the 
Fig. 1. Histograms of the raw ASHRAE Database regarding distributions for the key variables in thermal comfort and PMV values before data cleaning as a first step.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
5 
accuracy of the predictions. As a future work, evaluation of the distinct 
variations maybe subjected in other works.
Fig. 1 displays the distribution of the primary predictor variables 
(clo, M, T
a
, T
r
, RH, and V
a
) in conjunction with the target variable PMV. 
The majority of variables exhibit distributions that are either normal or 
closely approximate normal, with the exception of V
a 
and T
r
, which 
display lengthy tails and possible outliers. These observations indicate 
that it may be necessary to either transform these variables or deal with 
the outliers.
An analysis of key variable distributions reveals important charac -
teristics for the modeling process: the target variable PMV displays an 
almost Gaussian distribution centered around zero. This is important 
since it enables better performance for most ML algorithms. On the other 
hand, the input variables present a varied distribution; T
a 
and T
r 
are 
pretty close to normal, maybe slightly skewed, with T
r 
showing a very 
marked peak at lower values. Also notable for skewness are the distri -
butions for clo and RH, which are bimodal and probably indicative of 
lurking potential subgroups in the data. Distributions for M and V
a
are 
also highly skewed, displaying the long tail characteristics that indicate 
outliers. These give a strong signal that some careful preprocessing, 
especially for dealing with skewness and outliers, is very appropriate to 
ensure robust model performance.
2.2.2. Correlation matrix
A correlation matrix is key to giving linear dependencies between 
pairs of variables in the data set for ML and statistical analysis. This, 
therefore, points to the quantities by which different variables correlate, 
guiding the process of feature selection and dimensionality reduction. It 
identifies features that might be redundant or highly predictive of one 
another. For example, a high correlation between two variables could 
indicate multicollinearity, which usually adversely affects the perfor -
mance of some ML algorithms [ 23 ]. Such features and attributes were 
important for improving model interpretability and ensuring that input 
features all make independent contributions to the model ’ s prediction 
task.
The correlation matrix displayed in Fig. 2 provides insights into the 
relation between the predictors and the target variable PMV. The 
heatmap demonstrates a substantial correlation between T
a 
and T
r 
with 
PMV, indicating that they have a major effect on thermal comfort. In 
contrast, factors such as clo and V
a 
exhibit weaker associations, sug -
gesting that their influence may be more nuanced or contingent upon 
specific circumstances.
A close examination of the correlation matrix in Fig. 2 reveals several 
intriguing relationships between the variables. The most obvious one is a 
strong positive correlation between T
a
and T
r
, which equals 0.92 — this 
relationship may point to the possibility of multicollinearity. Moreover, 
PMV has quite a high correlation with both T
a 
(0.78) and T
r 
(0.76), 
indicating that thermal comfort largely depends on the temperature- 
related variables. On the other hand, clo is negatively correlated with 
both T
a 
(   0.47) and T
r 
(   0.50), which represents an adaptive likely 
behavior in which clo decreases as temperature increases. Other vari -
ables, such as RH and V
a
, show weaker correlations, signifying lesser 
direct interaction. To sum up, Fig. 2 ′ s correlation matrix shows some 
critical linear relationships between variables that are related to tem -
perature. These relationships may affect how well a model works when 
there is multicollinearity.
2.3. Data cleaning and preprocessing
Data cleaning and preprocessing are essential phases in every data- 
driven projects since they establish the basis for precise and signifi -
cant analysis. It involves a methodical examination of missing values, 
anomalies, and discrepancies in data. If these processes are not unad -
dressed, skewed outcomes and diminished model efficacy can be 
observed. Furthermore, preparation procedures like normalization, 
scaling, and feature transformation are essential to convert the data into 
forms that satisfy the specific requirements of different algorithms, 
hence facilitating the effective processing of inputs by the generated 
models. These steps will enhance the quality, dependability, and inter -
pretability of the data collection, yielding more robust and reliable re -
sults. Consequently, data cleaning and preparation are imperative for 
any endeavor aimed at yielding successful outcomes in ML or statistical 
Fig. 2. Correlation matrix Heatmap in python for ASHRAE Database.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
6 
analysis.
2.3.1. Handling missing data
In this section, the issue of missing data in the T
r 
and PMV columns, 
which contained a considerable number, is tackled. The existence of 
those missing values poses a risk to the analysis ’ s accuracy and reli -
ability. Therefore, it was crucial to handle these missing values carefully 
in areas such as thermal conditions, which form the foundation for un -
derstanding and predicting comfort, to maintain the integrity of the 
information within the dataset. Accordingly, the systematic treatment of 
missing values resulted in making the dataset robust, hence forming a 
solid basis for accurate and meaningful subsequent analysis.
Missing T
r 
values were calculated using Equation (1) using the 
relationship between globe temperature (T
g
), T
a 
and V
a 
given in the 
dataset [ 1 , 4 ]. Note that Lamberti et al. [ 19 ] also used the same method 
to calculate T
r
. The formula used is [ 24 ]: 
T
r
=
(
T
4
g
+ 2 . 5 × 10
8
× V
a
0 . 6
×
 
T
g
  T
a
)
)
0 . 25
(1) 
where T
g 
and T
a 
represent the globe and air temperatures in Kelvin, 
respectively, and V
a 
denotes the air velocity in meters per second. This 
approach guarantees that the T
r 
values are deduced in a manner that is 
scientifically significant, provided that the relevant variables are 
accessible.
The recalibration of the missing values in the PMV field is done using 
the available data. The variables important for the recalibration are T
a
, 
T
r
, V
a
, RH, M, and clo, leaning on basic physical relations governing 
thermal comfort. For the validation of recalculated PMV, the thermal 
comfort Python library was applied with the support of recognized 
standards for the values of thermal comfort. The library was designed to 
calculate PMV quite accurately through given PMV equations and 
guidelines. This approach served two purposes in such integration: 
filling the gaps in the data set and, at the same time, ensuring the 
integrity and reliability of the PMV data to match with the accepted 
requirements for thermal comfort analysis.
After cleaning and preprocessing with the imputation of missing 
values and treatment of outliers, the total records in the final dataset 
were 55443. The original data set initially had 107,583 records; how -
ever, after filtering criteria were put into place and missing values dealt 
with, along with the recalibration of key variables such as T
r 
and PMV, 
the final cleaned dataset consisted of this amount. This is a well- 
prepared dataset, forming a very solid base for ML models to improve 
the accuracy and reliability of predictions.
2.3.2. Identification and management of outliers
Outliers in data are points that greatly depart from the dataset ’ s 
overall distribution. Measurement flaws, data entry problems, or actual 
variability in the underlying events can all lead to these very extreme 
numbers. Although occasionally they offer insightful analysis of rare or 
unusual events, outliers sometimes skew statistical analyses and may 
compromise the efficacy of ML models. Data preparation thus depends 
critically on the identification and suitable management of outliers. This 
work aimed to identify dataset outliers using the Interquartile Range 
(IQR) method. Calculating the range between the first quartile (Q1) and 
the third quartile (Q3) and then considering any data point that lies 
notably beyond this range makes the IQR technique a strong statistical 
tool that detects outliers. Data points below the value of Q1   1.5 × IQR 
or above the value of Q3 + 1.5 × IQR are particularly noted as possible 
outliers.
Once the outliers have been found and cleaned up, Fig. 3 a and 3b 
show the before and after distributions of outliers in the T
r 
and V
a 
var -
iables. Outliers for the T
r 
variable were identified in Fig. 3 a, and the data 
set exhibited anomalous values such as 150 
◦
C. Similarly, in Fig. 3 b, 
outliers such as 50 m/s for the V
a 
variable were identified; these values 
were completely removed from the dataset after the cleaning process. 
These abnormalities are presumed to be primarily attributable to data 
entry errors. Eliminating outliers while preserving the statistical integ -
rity of the data set enhances the reliability of the analytical outcomes.
2.3.3. Data limitations
There are many things that can go wrong with data collection, 
including errors in the data itself or measurements that aren ’ t accurate 
enough, which can lead to sensing errors. Sometimes, the thing being 
studied is naturally variable. However, such restrictions can have a 
significant impact on the outcomes and hence lead to flawed or biased 
predictions. Because of this, it is important to carefully look over and 
understand these limitations to make sure that the study can be trusted 
and that it is appropriate to draw conclusions from it.
This study specifically establishes specific data filtering criteria to 
focus on standard indoor environmental conditions, thereby ensuring 
the trustworthiness and usefulness of the analysis. The chosen intervals 
Fig. 3. Outlier detection of the raw ASHRAE Database regarding wrongly 
stated entries for T
r 
(a), and V
a 
(b).
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
7 
for important variables are in accordance with recognized thermal 
comfort standards, eliminating any outliers or extreme values that may 
skew the findings.
Table 3 expands extensively on the comprehensive filtering strategy 
utilized in this study, which is based on clearly defined criteria. In 
accordance with established norms and guidelines in thermal comfort, 
each component is confined to certain limits. To evaluate various cli -
matic conditions, such as tropical zones, T
a 
and T
r 
are confined to the 
range of 15 
◦
C to 35 
◦
C. To maintain consistency in data density, relative 
humidity is constrained between 10 % and 89 % to encompass all cli -
mates represented in the ASHRAE Dataset. clo and M are restricted to 
conventional indoor activities and attire selections. V
a 
is sustained be -
tween 0 m/s and 0.45 m/s to ensure accurate depiction of standard in -
ternal air circulation in the data. In addition, PMV is constrained 
between   3 and 3 on the PMV scale to ensure that the dataset fairly 
covers the full spectrum of thermal comfort ratings. Finally, thermal 
comfort variables are shown in Table 3 with their ranges, it should be 
noted that the values out of the given ranges in the ASHRAE Dataset are 
omitted as a result of final cleaning process. In order to visually assess 
the impact of these constraints on the dataset, a histogram showing the 
distribution of the selected variable ranges is generated and presented in 
Fig. 4 .
According to Fig. 4 , for every variable, numbers in each interval 
represent the concentration of data points, clearly showing how the 
filtering method affects the dataset. By concentrating on these regulated 
ranges, the histogram emphasizes the improved quality of the infor -
mation and guarantees that the following analysis is based on data that 
fairly reflects the conditions pertinent to thermal comfort. Moreover, the 
distributions illustrated in Fig. 4 demonstrate the process of data 
“ cleaning ” and highlight the focal region inside the filtered data set 
about the selected intervals. This filtering procedure, however unusual, 
entails the removal of extreme values from the data set or the exclusion 
of observations beyond the average range, thereby failing to represent 
the actual conditions observed in reality. Excluding extremely high M ’ s 
(e.g., regions with vigorous physical activity) or excessively high/humid 
conditions (e.g., naturally ventilated structures in tropical areas) from 
the dataset may diminish the model ’ s efficacy in buildings characterized 
by significant geographical or functional diversity. Visual data provides 
a strong basis for thermal comfort prediction analysis and supports the 
robustness of the filtering criteria, thereby enabling evaluation of the ML 
models to be built in the upcoming works of the authors of the present 
investigation. This filtering strategy enables the model to produce more 
precise predictions in indoor environments classified as “ standard ” due 
to data homogeneity and consistency, hence diminishing uncertainty in 
ML applications. Ultimately, given the data is derived from literature, 
discrepancies in the calibration of measuring instruments or variations 
in data-collecting techniques between various research may not be 
entirely resolved. This may indirectly influence the model ’ s confidence 
range, particularly for sensitive measures like V
a 
or T
r
. Consequently, it 
is important to acknowledge that the filtering and removal techniques 
outlined in the Data Limitations section are essential for consistently 
analyzing certain situations and for successfully training the founda -
tional ML models; yet, there may be instances that remain unfiltered. 
Nonetheless, the results of the created model must be meticulously 
scrutinized for user attributes outside the filtered data or environmental 
influences. This strategy may be beneficial in energy-efficient work -
places or residential buildings.
These carefully selected filtering parameters help to concentrate the 
research on data points reflecting appropriate and regulated indoor 
environmental conditions. This work proposes to augment the reliability 
and applicability of the subsequently developed ML models by imposing 
these limitations. The subsequent sections will rigorously assess the 
impact of these limitations on the model ’ s efficacy and generalizability, 
elucidating how the filtered dataset influences the outcomes and 
application of the ML approach in predicting thermal comfort.
2.3.4. An analysis of data filtering and its impact on the distribution of 
variables
This part involves a thorough analysis of the data filtering process 
and its subsequent impact on the distribution of essential variables in the 
dataset. The aforementioned filtering procedures were applied to refine 
the dataset by confining the variables to ranges characteristic of stan -
dard indoor ambient conditions. The methodology is crucial for focusing 
the analysis on the most pertinent contexts for assessing thermal com -
fort. It eliminates outliers and extreme conditions that could distort the 
results or create bias. Comparing the dataset before and after these 
filtering criteria will help us assess variable distribution changes.
2.3.4.1. Visualizing relationships between variables: Scatter plot matrix of 
the original dataset. Scatter plots provide the basic tool for graphically 
examining pairs of variables ’ associations in EDA. Based on the values of 
two variables, a scatter plot lines its points, each an observation from the 
dataset, on the pertinent axes. Scatter plots, which use a comparison 
between one variable and another, allow researchers to identify possible 
patterns, correlations, or anomalies in the data [ 25 ]. To completely 
grasp the links among the variables in the first dataset, a scatter plot 
matrix was developed. The scatter plots in this matrix give a graphic 
picture of the interactions among the variables, showing every 
conceivable pair of variables. The scatter plot matrix allows us to 
identify potential data outliers, groupings, and linear or non-linear as -
sociations. Such visual analysis allows one to identify links and re -
lationships that may later influence the modeling process. The scatter 
plot matrix, which guides our research, reveals information on the 
original dataset ’ s distribution and structure, as illustrated in Fig. 5 . This 
visualization assists the creation of predictive models and helps to find 
important links and patterns, guiding the use of data filtering criteria.
The scatter plot matrix reveals various problems in the original data 
that might influence the analysis. First of all, some variables like “ V
a
” 
and “ M ” exhibit highly skewed distributions, implying that they are not 
well represented on their entire range. This lack of representation may 
limit the ability to extrapolate models developed from this database. 
Moreover, there are evident prospects for outliers, particularly when it 
comes to relationships between “ T
a
” and “ T
r
. ” Proper management of 
these outliers can distort the study and reduce the accuracy of prediction 
models. Other variable pairs also show weak or no linear correlation, 
Table 3 
Elimination of the raw ASHRAE Database outliers to obtain the modified ASH -
RAE Database considering specific ranges of each variable for filtering the data 
process.
Variable Range Average 
value
Justifications
PMV   3   + 3 0.06 According to ASHRAE 55 and ISO 7730, it 
fluctuates between   3 (extreme cold) and 
+ 3 (extreme hot).
T
a
15 – 35 
◦
C 24.19 This range was chosen considering the 
different climatic situations counting 
tropical climates
RH 10 – 89 % 46,73 This range was chosen considering the 
different climatic situations counting 
tropical climates
T
r
15 – 35 
◦
C 24.31 This range was chosen considering the 
different climatic situations counting 
tropical climates
V
a
0 – 0.45 
m/s
0.09 The interval where the data set is dense 
was preferred.
clo 0.08 – 1.2 0.65 A clo value of 0.5 is often assigned to 
lightweight apparel, while a value of 
about 1.0 is designated for winter 
garments.
M 0.8 – 3 1.21 According to ASHRAE 55, M varies 
depending on physical activity. It can be 
0.8 M for sitting and 3.0 M for moderate 
activity.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
8 
indicating that linear modeling techniques may have difficulty accu -
rately representing any underlying patterns pertaining to the data 
involved. Furthermore, the strong positive relationship between “ T
a
” 
and “ T
r
” causes concerns over multicollinearity, which can make it 
harder to understand regression models by increasing variability and 
hiding which variables are more important. As a result, comprehensive 
data preprocessing is required to address such issues and improve the 
reliability of subsequent analysis.
2.3.4.2. Scatter plot matrix of the filtered data. After applying filter 
criteria, Fig. 6 displays the pairplot. The purpose of this criteria was to 
eliminate data points that fall outside the normal ranges for indoor 
environmental conditions, as defined by standards such as ASHRAE and 
ISO. The resulting distributions demonstrate greater limitations because 
variables such as T
a
, RH, T
r
, V
a
, clo, and M have narrower ranges. The 
consequent improved dataset more accurately represents common 
interior situations, minimizing the impact of unusual and extreme 
values.
According to Fig. 6 , the scatter plot matrix of the filtered dataset 
shows some really significant changes over the original one. First, the 
elimination of outliers and extreme values has reflected the concentra -
tion of variables such as “ T
a
” and “ T
r
. ” This concentration indicates that 
the data now more accurately matches typical indoor conditions. There 
are also clear links between variables, like the linear correlation be -
tween “ T
a
” and “ T
r
, ” which shows that the filtering has reduced un -
necessary variation while keeping important correlations.
The filtering process has successfully narrowed the dataset to the 
cases most pertinent for evaluating thermal comfort. Eliminating data 
points that are outside the standard comfort range enhances the ana -
lysis ’ s rigor, guaranteeing that the derived insights are relevant to actual 
interior circumstances. The filtered data exhibits more uniform distri -
butions, hence diminishing the probability of distorted conclusions 
resulting from extreme outliers. Implementing this step is essential for 
improving the precision and dependability of any future modeling or 
statistical analysis conducted on the data.
The visual comparison between Figs. 5 and 6 highlights the impor -
tance of data filters in environmental studies. The pairplots demonstrate 
how filtering can effectively isolate the underlying relationships within 
the dataset, thereby improving the representativeness of the data for 
typical indoor situations and improving the overall quality of the 
analysis.
Fig. 7 illustrates the preprocessing workflow of the data analysis 
employed in this study. The process begins with the loading of the 
dataset as shown in Fig. 1 , followed by EDA to identify key trends and 
potential issues, such as missing data as shown in Table 2 and outliers as 
shown in Fig. 3 . The next step is to handle missing data, ensuring no gaps 
Fig. 4. Histograms of the raw ASHRAE Database regarding eliminations for the key variables in thermal comfort and PMV values after data cleaning considering 
specified limits.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
9 
remain that could compromise the analysis. Subsequently, the outlier 
identification phase is executed to identify and address any extreme 
numbers that may distort the results. The data undergoes transformation 
processes, including normalization or encoding, to prepare it for analysis 
as shown in Fig. 4 . Finally, filters are applied to narrow down the dataset 
to relevant scenarios, leading to a dataset that is ready for robust 
modeling as shown in Fig. 6 . This structured approach, as depicted in the 
flowchart Fig. 7 , ensures that the data is meticulously prepared, 
reducing the risk of inaccuracies in the subsequent model-building 
phase. SHAP method was applied to boost the explainability of the 
model. The RF model was trained first; subsequently, the SHAP values 
were computed, and an individual analysis of each input ’ s effect on the 
PMV estimate was examined. This displayed more clearly the in -
teractions inside the model and the relative significance of the variables.
3. Results and discussion
It is practical that the low-parameter PMV approach can be used in 
crowded and large indoor spaces, like conference centers, multipurpose 
halls, and other similarly large venues, even though it has some limi -
tations due to limited data. Individuals congregating in such settings 
frequently exhibit differing metabolic rates and varying degrees of 
clothing insulation efficacy. Nonetheless, significant data may be ob -
tained without a comprehensive measurement infrastructure, since the 
proposed model can forecast PMV using only a limited number of 
essential parameters (Ta, clo, or M). Rapid and rational comfort evalu -
ations are therefore attainable by collecting data on the ambient tem -
perature of the space and the general level of attire in the audience. 
Subsequent studies may seek to improve the model by collecting more 
Fig. 5. Pairplots using the ASHRAE Database for the relation of key variables with each other before applying filtering criteria.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
10 
comprehensive data, such as additional variables like activity type, 
sitting time, and demographic age profiles, and tailoring it to broader 
contexts. The main aim of the current work was to provide details on 
database evaluation and its consistency through preprocessing stages, 
marking it as a pioneering study in the literature. The user can apply the 
proposed methodology in this work to a specific case if they write codes 
in Python.
3.1. Feature selection
Feature Selection is essential in data preparation, as it seeks to 
identify the most pertinent traits that significantly aid in predicting the 
target variable. Reducing the number of features will help us to simplify 
the model, improve interpretability, lower overfitting, and lower 
computational cost. This work combines Feature importance, 
SelectKBest, SHAP, PDP, and P-box analyses to ensure a robust and 
comprehensive feature selection procedure. Fig. 8 represents the feature 
selection process that follows data preprocessing. Each methodology 
successively contributes to finding the most important variables for the 
model, as given by the individual pathways leading to the final feature 
set. Together these techniques give assurance that the selected features 
are both statistically robust and interpretable, and they become the basis 
on which the final model is built.
Feature importance is an efficient method for figuring the signifi -
cance of a feature for assessing the significance of a feature by examining 
its ability to reduce node impurity across all trees in the forest. 
SelectKBest analysis provides a straightforward method for identifying 
the best predictive features by ranking attributes in relation to the target 
Fig. 6. Pairplots using the ASHRAE Database for the relation of key variables with each other after applying filtering criteria.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
11 
variable according to statistical significance. Originating from cooper -
ative game theory, SHAP values offer a comprehensive, instance-specific 
analysis of the influence of each feature on model predictions, guaran -
teeing that our selection encompasses both general and nuanced feature 
significance. The P-box analysis shows how the relative value of features 
changes, which is not always evident. This would facilitate the process of 
determining which traits contribute consistently across several different 
data sets.
The following techniques have been selected for their individual 
advantages: SelectKBest, for its statistical soundness; RF, for its resis -
tance and group evaluation possibilities; SHAP, for its good under -
standability; and P-box Plot, to investigate reliability and variability. All 
of these techniques combined provide a thorough way of feature selec -
tion and ways to improve generality, understandability, and model 
performance. The number of features in our ML study had to be reduced 
to boost the model ’ s efficacy, prevent overfitting, and improve inter -
pretability. Applying different techniques for feature selection can 
achieve this goal. The comparison and analysis of various approaches 
revealed the most important independent variables for determining the 
PMV in indoor situations. For this purpose, Table 4 presents a summary 
of feature selection processes based on the feature selection methods and 
thermal comfort parameters of the PMV formula by Fanger [ 6 ]. The 
asterisks in this table indicate the most effective features, which are 
derived outputs of the analyses. The following subsections below 
include the detailed explanations on all outputs in Table 4 .
In this study, RF and SVM models were preferred for PMV estimation. 
PMV is a variable that is affected by the combination of environmental 
and individual factors and has complex and nonlinear relationships. 
Correlation analysis reveals that T
r
, T
a
, clo, M, RH and V
a 
variables show 
Fig. 7. Preprocessing workflow of the data analysis.
Fig. 8. The feature selection processes that follow data preprocessing.
Table 4 
Summary of feature selection processes.
RF Model
Feature Selection Methods / 
Thermal Comfort Parameters
T
a 
( ℃ )
RH 
(%)
T
r 
( ℃ )
V
a 
(m/s)
clo M 
(met)
Feature Importance ( Fig. 9 a) x ​ x* ​ x x
SelectKBest ( Fig. 10 ) x* ​ x* ​ x x
SHAP ( Fig. 11 a) x* ​ x ​ x x
P-box ( Fig. 12 ) x* ​ x* ​ ​ ​
PDP ( Fig. 14 a) x ​ x ​ ​ ​
SVM Model
Feature Selection Methods / 
Thermal Comfort 
Parameters
T
a 
( ℃ )
RH 
(%)
T
r 
( ℃ )
V
a 
(m/s)
clo M 
(met)
Feature Importance ( Fig. 9 b) x* ​ x ​ x x
SelectKBest            
SHAP ( Fig. 11 b) x ​ x* ​ x x
P-box ( Fig. 13 ) x* ​ x* ​ ​ ​
PDP ( Fig. 14 b) x ​ x ​ ​ ​
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
12 
strong relationships with PMV. Therefore, models with more flexible 
and powerful learning capacity should be used. RF is an ensemble 
learning algorithm composing of a high number of decision trees and is 
quite successful in modeling complex, nonlinear data relationships [ 26 ]. 
One of the most important advantages of this model is that it increases 
model explainability by determining variable importance ranking [ 27 ]. 
RF is resistant to overfitting, provides flexibility in managing missing 
data, and generates more robust predictions in the presence of noisy 
input. Conversely, the SVM model demonstrates enhanced efficacy, 
particularly in high-dimensional datasets and scenarios including 
nonlinear interactions [ 28 ]. SVM can flexibly model nonlinear decision 
boundaries through kernel methods and thus offers an effective alter -
native in complex estimation problems such as PMV. The high gener -
alization performance, especially in small and medium-sized data sets, 
has led to the use of SVM in this study.
3.1.1. Feature importance
RF is a way to learn as a group that makes a forest of trees by figuring 
out how important each feature is while modeling a target variable [ 29 ]. 
During training, several trees are constructed, and one feature is utilized 
to split at a node while considering its contribution to reducing node 
impurity. To determine an overall rating, the significance of all attri -
butes throughout the trees is added. Fig. 9 a presents the feature 
importance scores derived from the RF method. As shown by Fig. 9 a, the 
most important variable was T
r
, with a feature importance of 0.6. The 
result is the strongest evidence for T
r
’ s important impact on PMV pre -
diction. The importance of T
a
, clo and M in this model is further sup -
ported. Nevertheless, the effect of factors such as RH and V
a 
is minimal, 
suggesting that they have a limited influence on the model ’ s predictive 
accuracy. Fig. 9 b illustrates the thermal comfort parameter significance 
ratings obtained from the SVM methodology. Fig. 9 b shows that the 
most important variable is T
a 
with a feature importance of 0.6. The 
result is the most convincing evidence of the significant effect of T
a 
on 
PMV prediction. By this analysis, the importance of T
r
, clo and M is 
further supported with a score of 0.4. However, the effect of features 
such as RH and V
a 
is negligible, indicating their limited impact on the 
model ’ s prediction accuracy. The results indicate that the feature sig -
nificance derived by SVM and RF are almost the same and generally 
confirm one another.
3.1.2. SelectKBest analysis
To further validate and cross-check the results obtained from the 
Feature importance, the SelectKBest approach [ 30 ] was also applied. 
This assesses the statistical significance of the represented features in the 
univariate testing of the target variable. The scores of the features in the 
SelectKBest approach are shown in Fig. 10 . The bar chart displays 
feature importance scores derived from the SelectKBest analysis. These 
scores depict the extent to which each feature contributes to predicting 
the target variable. The graph indicates that T
a 
and T
r 
have more in -
fluence on the predictions than the other variables with a score of about 
70000. This indicates that T
a 
and T
r 
are significant enough to enable 
accurate individual predictions of the target variable. M and clo also 
show average relevance, staying within the class boundaries and 
following T
a 
and T
r
. Conversely, RH and V
a 
had very low scores. This 
indicates that they do not have a strong one-to-one relationship with the 
dependent variable under study. These findings suggest that 
temperature-associated factors (T
a 
and T
r
) are crucial predictors of the 
response variable due to their direct impact on individual comfort levels 
in temperature situations. Besides satisfactorily trimming away unnec -
essary features, SelectKBest does well to prioritize to those features that 
have large effects alone. This information provides us with practical 
suggestions for future improvements to our model. Results from 
SelectKBest are in concordance with the previous RF findings: T
r 
and clo 
appear to be the first two ranked features. Most interestingly, after T
r
, T
a 
shows a high score, thus proving the relationship between T
a 
and PMV. 
M ’ s relative importance is only slightly less than that of T
r 
and clo, but it 
Fig. 9. Feature importance analyses as one of the investigated feature selection 
processes for RF (a), and SVM (b) ML models implementing the modified 
ASHRAE Database.
Fig. 10. SelectKBest scores for RF implementing the modified ASHRAE Data -
base as one of the investigated feature selection processes.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
13 
still stands as a top predictor for this method.
3.1.3. SHAP analysis
After the preliminary selection of features using Feature importance 
and validation by SelectKBest, the influence of all selected features was 
further proved by the SHapley Additive exPlanations method. SHAP is a 
powerful tool that provides detailed insights about how each feature 
affects to the final model estimation. The model achieves its objective by 
allocating each feature ’ s contribution to each prediction, making it one 
of the most interpretable methods for determining feature importance 
[ 31 ].
The SHAP summary plot for RF in Fig. 11 a shows the effects of 
different features on the PMV predictions with a graphic design. The 
SHAP value, which describes the contribution of any given feature on 
the magnitude of the model ’ s output, is displayed on the horizontal axis. 
Positive SHAP values have a positive effect on PMV, as well as vice versa. 
Fig. 11 a provides the following key observations: T
a 
is found to be the 
most important factor, and its SHAP values range widely from positive to 
negative. This figure shows how strongly T
a 
depends on and changes 
based on PMV predictions. Significant effects are also observed in the 
clo, T
r
, and M. clo has a predominantly positive effect on PMV. The 
result reflects the fact that the higher the level of clo, the higher the PMV 
value, making the perceived environment warmer. The correlation be -
tween T
a 
and T
r
, together with T
a
’ s superior practicality and ease of 
measurement compared to T
r
, aligns with previous results from both 
Feature importance and SelectKBest analyses, hence endorsing the pri -
oritization of T
a 
in the final feature set. Furthermore, the variables V
a 
and RH appear to exert minimal influence on PMV. Fig. 11 b presents the 
SHAP summary plot for SVM and highlights the following critical points: 
Similar to the RF model, T
r 
was found to be the most influential factor, 
with SHAP values ranging from positive to negative over a wide range. 
This result confirmed the strong influence of T
r 
on PMV estimates. 
Moreover, the analysis revealed significant effects on clo, placing M 
third and Ta fourth after clo. However, V
a 
and RH were found to be the 
least influential variables, supporting the previous analysis results. The 
results confirmed the previous analyses.
3.1.4. P-box analysis
P-boxes help show how uncertain and varied a piece of information is 
with the aid of a graph, particularly for showing a variable ’ s range and 
distribution in different contexts. When it comes to assessing the impact 
of certain attributes upon a certain variable while considering uncer -
tainty, P-box plots offer a strong approach because they provide both 
upper and lower limits for potential values. Once again, this approach 
works well when one needs to understand how far apart or extreme 
values may be, thus making it an effective partner for any other kind of 
statistical analysis [ 32 ].
To complement the feature importance, SelectKBest and SHAP 
Fig. 11. SHAP summary plots for variables ’ impacts on PMV via RF (a), and SVM (b) as one of the investigated ML models implementing the modified ASH -
RAE Database.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
14 
analysis, P-box plots were generated to explore the relationship between 
key environmental features and the PMV. Fig. 12 shows the P-box plots 
for RF, which show how the PMV is spread out across different ranges of 
important factors, such as T
a
, T
r
, and other environmental variables. As 
shown in Fig. 12 , there is a clear trend that higher values of T
a 
and T
r 
lead to higher PMV values. This fits well with the results of the corre -
lation and SHAP analyses. These graphs describe the overall view of how 
PMV varies not only with the central tendencies but also with the entire 
distribution and variations. Hence, it helps in identifying potential 
outliers. The P-box plots unveil quite important facts in that the rela -
tionship between T
a
, T
r
, and PMV is linear and strong. Besides, a number 
of other variables, for example clo and M, show rather complicated, 
almost nonlinear relationships with PMV. These are quite important 
findings to make sure that chosen features bring out a good represen -
tation of the dynamics that affect thermal comfort. Thus, the previously 
undertaken feature selection is strongly substantiated, and a robust 
framework for P-box analysis is provided to gain better insight into the 
interaction between environmental conditions and thermal comfort as 
modeled by PMV.
The P-box plots unveil critical facts in that the relationship between 
T
a
, T
r
, and PMV is linear and strong. Besides, several other variables, for 
example, clo and M, show rather complicated, almost nonlinear re -
lationships with PMV. These are quite important findings to make sure 
that chosen features bring out a good representation of the dynamics 
that affect thermal comfort. Thus, the feature selection conducted earlier 
is strongly supported, and a robust framework for P-box analysis is 
provided to enhance understanding of the interaction between envi -
ronmental conditions and thermal comfort, as modeled by PMV. P-box 
analysis was conducted for the SVM model illustrated in Fig. 13 , and the 
results corresponded closely with those of the RF model. Similarly, Tr 
Fig. 12. P-box plots, processing the modified ASHRAE Database, for the relationship between PMV and key environmental features using RF model.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
15 
and Ta values increase alongside PMV, with other components exhib -
iting analogous trends. This evidence demonstrates the validity of the RF 
model analysis.
3.1.5. Partial dependence plots
Commonly used ML tools, PDP, use one feature to predict an 
outcome while maintaining the rest constant. The projected outcomes 
for different cases show how other variables affect the outcome mea -
sures through an interactive plot of predicted values resulting from just 
one input [ 33 ]. This technique is particularly useful when interpreting 
complex models, such as ensemble methods, because it allows one 
variable to be understood at a time, isolated from other influences, 
making its behavior more obvious.
The final analysis involved creating what are known as PDPs to 
better visualize the influence of selected features on PMV values. PDP 
allows us to graphically display the marginal effect of a feature on the 
predicted outcome while holding all other features at some value. 
Fig. 14 a contrasts the PDPs of T
a 
and T
r
. The PDP in Fig. 14 a shows that 
both T
a 
and T
r 
together exert a positive influence on the PMV, although 
T
r 
is slightly stronger. This result implies that T
r 
may have a more sig -
nificant impact on thermal comfort than the other two variables. There 
are almost linear relationships between the two plots, which means that 
if either T
a 
or T
r 
goes up, the PMV value will also go up, giving the 
impression of more warmth than there really is. But even though these 
graphs show clear effects of T
a 
or T
r 
on PMV, the choice to make the 
models simpler is still critical. Given their similar contributions to PMV 
and the marginally greater effect of T
r
, it may be practical to use either of 
them in the modeling process. This study favored the use of T
a 
as an 
independent variable due to its purported independence from other 
parameters, including T
g
. Therefore, selecting T
a 
necessitates avoiding 
Fig. 13. P-box plots, processing the modified ASHRAE Database, for the relationship between PMV and key environmental features using SVM model.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
16 
more polarized forms, making the predictions robust yet manageable. As 
shown in Fig. 14 b, the RF model outperforms the SVM model when 
predicting PMV. The RF model effectively shows the relation between 
variables such as T
a
, T
r
, and PMV, while the SVM model only shows 
these relationships in a linear manner. The RF model clearly shows the 
rapid increase in PMV after 26 
◦
C, while the SVM model ignores this 
change and assumes a linear increase. The PDP plot of T
a 
and T
r 
shows 
that RF provides a more adaptable method to estimate complex vari -
ables such as PMV.
3.2. Final features ’ validation
The ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database is included in this 
study; it encompasses almost all geographical regions and building types 
in the world; therefore, we can assume that it reflects all meteorological 
circumstances and design scenarios, approximately. The dataset ’ s depth 
and variety, encompassing several buildings, seasons, and both interior 
and outside temperature values, enhance the model ’ s adaptability to 
diverse settings with 107,583 data entries. Specifically, during the data 
preparation and filtering stages, any outliers were removed and the 
variables were normalized to set standard ranges in order to make the 
model more general. Five main factors contribute to the overfitting issue 
in ML applications: small datasets, complex models, noisy environments, 
excessive features, and excessive training time. The only thing that could 
have caused this study to be too good was using too many features. This 
problem was fixed by cutting the PMV formula from six parameters to 
three using the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database. The Chinese 
thermal comfort dataset [ 34 ], developed by seven institutes, consists of 
41,977 data sets from 49 cities spanning five temperature zones over a 
span of two decades. Moreover, to validate this process, the Chinese 
Thermal Comfort Dataset has been analyzed by the same code written in 
Python, and the same results on the reduction issue were achieved as 
shown in Figs. 15, 16, 17, and 18 . Finally, while feature importance, the 
SelectKBest, SHAP, P-box, and PDP analyses were used for feature se -
lection, a comparative analysis of feature selection scores across multi -
ple datasets improves the robustness of the findings. The study has cross- 
validation and sensitivity analysis on different training subsets.
The consistent results, confirmed by PDP and SHAP, showed that T
a
, 
clo, and M were the most important factors in ML analyses. These are 
thermal comfort parameters used in HVAC systems to predict PMV. 
These results were derived from both importance scores: Feature 
importance and SelectKBest. These variables showed not only the 
highest scores but also the most appreciable and consistent effect on 
PMV in all the analyses performed. In this way, a large multimethod 
validation process assures the final model is highly statistically robust 
and very interpretable.
Based on the evidence from Feature Importance, SelectKBest, SHAP, 
P-Box, and PDP analyses, T
a
, clo, and M were chosen as the most 
important features for PMV. All these features received the highest 
importance scores across all five analyses and exhibited significant ef -
fects on PMV. The statistical justification and the visual validation of the 
selection ensure that the final model is both accurate and 
Fig. 14. Partial dependence of PMV values of the modified ASHRAE Database on T
a 
and T
r 
using RF (a) and SVM (b) models.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
17 
comprehensible. Therefore, this feature selection process has been 
thorough in singling out T
a
, clo, and M as key variables driving PMV. 
The choice made makes the model more accurate while keeping it 
simple. This builds on what was already done and makes it possible to do 
a more in-depth study of thermal comfort in indoor settings.
Using Fanger ’ s PMV parameters [ 6 ], the selection of final features 
was T
a
, clo, and M after an extensive feature selection approach that 
employed Feature Importance, SelectKBest, and SHAP analysis as well as 
validation with PDP. At first, both T
a 
and T
r 
were thought to be 
important variables because they had high significance ranking scores 
and showed similar trends across all methods. However, it turned out 
that they had similar effects on predicting PMV, with neither playing a 
major role according to the PDP. Despite this, both factors continue to 
significantly contribute to the overall prediction accuracy of the model. 
Since T
r 
often depends on other factors like T
g 
and V
a
, which complicate 
the model more than it should be, T
a 
was chosen instead to avoid any 
possible dependencies from these aforementioned factors. Thus, clo and 
M are the final selected variables that maintain model fidelity while 
explaining the main drivers of thermal comfort without making it too 
complex. Therefore, the resultant model is simple yet accurate, making 
it applicable to indoor environmental investigations. This method can 
help with energy management and comfort by quickly and easily 
figuring out the PMV value. This is especially helpful in places where 
people don ’ t interact with each other much, like nursing homes, nurs -
eries, or elder care facilities.
All the works that were summed up in the introduction use ML 
techniques and the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database to 
accurately find TSV, TPV, TP, TCV, and PMV. None of them has used 
Feature importance, the SelectKBest, SHAP, P-box, and PDP analyses 
combined with RF and SVM ML models to reduce the six thermal com -
fort parameters to three and determine the PMV, respectively. In addi -
tion, there are two ML methods used for comparison in this study. The 
SVM method achieves 70 % accuracy, while the RF method achieves 85 
%. The reason behind this difference is due to the fact that RF out -
performs SVM in accuracy due to its robustness, ability to capture input 
diversity, and improved model stability. RF ’ s tree-based design provides 
greater tolerance for variable uncertainty after computation, even if it 
exhibits larger errors than SVM ’ s estimates. Studies have shown that, 
although it is difficult to determine the ideal parameter combination 
within the available dataset, RF effectively encapsulates the variability 
in the data and improves model stability [ 35 ]. RF ’ s exceptional accuracy 
is attributed to these key elements. According to our literature review as 
shown in Table 1 , apart from Park and Woo ’ s [ 21 ] study with 89.7 % 
accuracy, 25,261 reduced data entries, and three thermal comfort pa -
rameters demanding expansive thermal comfort measurement equip -
ment, there is no study near to our 85 % accuracy obtained for 55,443 
data entries with three cost-effective thermal comfort parameters using 
the ASHRAE Database. It should be noted that there are some attempts 
having the same aim using a specific database whose data entries are 
much less than ASHRAE ones. As it is known that ML methods give 
Fig. 15. Feature importance analyses as one of the investigated feature selec -
tion processes for RF (a), and SVM (b) ML models implementing the Chi -
nese Database.
Fig. 16. SHAP summary plots for variables ’ impacts on PMV via RF as one of the investigated ML models implementing the Chinese Database.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
18 
reliable results if they have many diverse data points. Therefore, the 
Chinese Thermal Comfort Dataset, having 41,977 entries, is preferred to 
validate our Feature importance, the SelectKBest, SHAP, P-box, and PDP 
analyses, which are the bases of developed ML models, on the thermal 
comfort parameters ’ reduction from six to three.
4. Conclusion
The ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database provides a signifi -
cant advance in improving thermal comfort prediction through ML. This 
numerical investigation provides the most comprehensive data cleaning 
procedure in the literature, which enhances the reliability of thermal 
comfort indices and paves the way for smarter HVAC systems. With 
55,443 observations reduced from 107583, the evaluated database 
emphasizes the interaction between environmental factors and comfort. 
As smart building technologies evolve, integrating ML will boost energy 
efficiency and occupant well-being. The database also supports ongoing 
research and model validation. As the science progresses, it ’ s crucial to 
consider thermal comfort ’ s complexity, particularly for vulnerable 
populations, to design inclusive environments. The stringent data 
cleaning and standardization procedures enhance the reliability of the 
thermal comfort indices, laying the groundwork for advanced and 
flexible HVAC systems. Furthermore, when Feature importance, 
SelectKBest, SHAP, and PDP analyses were put together, they showed 
that T
a
, clo, and M were the most important factors in predicting PMV. 
These features ensure that the final model is statistically robust, inter -
preted, and simple, enabling better analysis of indoor thermal comfort 
while avoiding unnecessary complexity. ML techniques must be inte -
grated into smart building technologies as they advance to create sys -
tems that can adapt dynamically to real-time situations, eventually 
Fig. 17. P-box plots, processing the Chinese Database, for the relationship between PMV and key environmental features using RF model.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
19 
enhancing occupant health and well-being.
This study is essential as it can minimize the number of input vari -
ables needed for calculations, hence decreasing the quantity of 
measuring equipment required, based on the literature utilizing ASH -
RAE databases and ML techniques. To the best of authors ’ knowledge, no 
research approaches our 85 % accuracy achieved with 55,443 data en -
tries utilizing three cost-effective thermal comfort parameters from the 
ASHRAE Database obtained by affordable measurement devices. The 
correlation matrix showed that the variables influencing thermal com -
fort were highly interrelated. In particular, the T
a 
and T
r 
had a high 
correlation coefficient of 0.92, showing that there is a strong relation -
ship between these two variables. Moreover, T
a 
and T
r 
had strong cor -
relations with PMV, with 0.78 and 0.76 correlation coefficients, 
respectively, showing that the temperature-related variables are the 
critical variables determining thermal comfort. On the other hand, clo 
demonstrated a moderate negative correlation with T
a 
(   0.47), which 
reflects how people change their clo behavior as temperatures increase 
and advance energy efficiency. In conclusion, the methodology 
demonstrated in this study indicates that PMV may be forecasted with 
fewer variables, providing benefits in usability and cost-effectiveness. 
The following key findings emerged from the analyses: 
a. The Feature importance method indicated T
r 
as the most significant 
characteristic, with a feature importance score of 0.5. Moreover, clo 
and M were identified as critical attributes, although RH and V
a 
showed minimal impact on the model ’ s predictive accuracy.
b. The SelectKBest analysis identified T
a 
and T
r 
as the most significant 
variables, indicating considerable statistical relevance and high -
lighting their critical importance in the model. In contrast, M and clo 
demonstrated lower scores, indicating reduced individual contribu -
tions and suggesting that their impact on the target variable is less 
direct or more subtle.
c. The SHAP analysis indicated that T
a 
was the most significant feature, 
demonstrating considerable dependencies and variability in PMV 
predictions. clo and M significantly influenced PMV, whereas T
r 
had 
a comparatively subdued effect in relation to T
a
, clo, and M. V
a 
and 
Fig. 18. Partial dependence of PMV values of the Chinese Database on T
a 
(a) and T
r 
(b) using RF model.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
20 
RH exhibited minimal influence, warranting their omission from the 
final model to enhance simplicity.
d. P-box analysis revealed a linear and strong relationship between T
a
, 
T
r
, and PMV, whereas clo and M exhibited more complex, nonlinear 
relationships. Similarly, PDP demonstrated that both T
a 
and T
r 
had a 
positive linear effect on PMV, with T
r 
exerting a slightly stronger 
influence. Given T
r
’ s dependencies, T
a 
was selected as the more in -
dependent predictor.
e. Specifically, incorporating ML models with data from the ASHRAE 
Global Thermal Comfort Database identifies T
a
, clo, and M as the 
most important PMV predictors. SHAP and PDP analyses developed 
based on the RF model, which is both robust and interpretable, are 
the most successful ones with an accuracy of 85 % to support indoor 
thermal comfort predictions in comparison to the SVM model with 
70 % accuracy under the same circumstances.
f. The Chinese Thermal Comfort Dataset, with 41,977 entries, validates 
our feature significance analyses, including Feature Importance, 
SelectKBest, SHAP, P-box, and PDP, which support the developed ML 
models to reduce thermal comfort parameters from six to three.
g. Decision-makers like building managers will therefore have more 
faith in the model, and heating – cooling techniques will be more 
precisely molded in field applications.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to acknowledge that this paper is submitted 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for PhD degree at Yildiz 
Technical University. This study has been financially supported by Yildiz 
Technical University Scientific Research Projects Coordination Depart -
ment, Project Number: FBA-2024-6401. The last author, Ahmet Selim 
Dalkılıç  would like to acknowledge  the support from by European 
Union ’ s Research and Innovation Program Horizon Europe under the 
Marie Sk ł odowska-Curie grant agreement (No 101130406) and UKRI 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EP/Y036662/1).
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] R.J. de Dear, A global database of thermal comfort field experiments, in: ASHRAE 
Transactions: Symposia, Vol. 104, American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and 
Air Conditioning Engineers, Inc., Atlanta, 1998: pp. 1141 – 1152. https://www. 
proquest.com/scholarly-journals/global-database-thermal-comfort-field- 
experiments/docview/192542601/se-2?accountid = 17384 (accessed November 
15, 2024).
[2] ISO, I, 7730: Ergonomics of the thermal environment Analytical determination and 
interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the PMV and PPD indices 
and local thermal comfort criteria, Management 3 (605) (2005) e615 .
[3] ASHRAE, A., ASHRAE Standard 55: Thermal environmental conditions for human 
occupancy, American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2017 .
[4] V. F ¨oldv ´ary Li ˇcina, T. Cheung, H. Zhang, R. de Dear, T. Parkinson, E. Arens, C. 
Chun, S. Schiavon, M. Luo, G. Brager, P. Li, S. Kaam, M.A. Adebamowo, M.M. 
Andamon, F. Babich, C. Bouden, H. Bukovianska, C. Candido, B. Cao, S. Carlucci, 
D.K.W. Cheong, J.-H. Choi, M. Cook, P. Cropper, M. Deuble, S. Heidari, M. 
Indraganti, Q. Jin, H. Kim, J. Kim, K. Konis, M.K. Singh, A. Kwok, R. Lamberts, D. 
Loveday, J. Langevin, S. Manu, C. Moosmann, F. Nicol, R. Ooka, N.A. Oseland, L. 
Pagliano, D. Petr ´a ˇs, R. Rawal, R. Romero, H.B. Rijal, C. Sekhar, M. Schweiker, F. 
Tartarini, S. Tanabe, K.W. Tham, D. Teli, J. Toftum, L. Toledo, K. Tsuzuki, R. De 
Vecchi, A. Wagner, Z. Wang, H. Wallbaum, L. Webb, L. Yang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhai, Y. 
Zhang, X. Zhou, Development of the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database II, 
Build Environ 142 (2018) 502 – 512. Doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.06.022.
[5] A.A. Farhan, K. Pattipati, B. Wang, P. Luh, Predicting individual thermal comfort 
using machine learning algorithms, in: In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on 
Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), 2015, pp. 708 – 713, https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/CoASE.2015.7294164 .
[6] P.O. Fanger, Thermal comfort. Analysis and applications in environmental 
engineering, 1970.
[7] S. Lu, W. Wang, C. Lin, E.C. Hameen, Data-driven simulation of a thermal comfort- 
based temperature set-point control with ASHRAE RP884, Build Environ 156 
(2019) 137 – 146, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.03.010 .
[8] T. Parkinson, R. de Dear, G. Brager, Nudging the adaptive thermal comfort model, 
Energy Build 206 (2020) 109559, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2019.109559 .
[9] Z. Wang, J. Wang, Y. He, Y. Liu, B. Lin, T. Hong, Dimension analysis of subjective 
thermal comfort metrics based on ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database 
using machine learning, J. Build. Eng. 29 (2020) 101120, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jobe.2019.101120 .
[10] M. Luo, J. Xie, Y. Yan, Z. Ke, P. Yu, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Comparing machine 
learning algorithms in predicting thermal sensation using ASHRAE Comfort 
Database II, Energy Build 210 (2020) 109776, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2020.109776 .
[11] X. Zhou, L. Xu, J. Zhang, B. Niu, M. Luo, G. Zhou, X. Zhang, Data-driven thermal 
comfort model via support vector machine algorithms: Insights from ASHRAE RP- 
884 database, Energy Build 211 (2020) 109795, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2020.109795 .
[12] G. Gao, J. Li, Y. Wen, DeepComfort: Energy-Efficient Thermal Comfort Control in 
Buildings Via Reinforcement Learning, IEEE Internet Things J 7 (2020) 
8472 – 8484, https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.2992117 .
[13] N. Ma, L. Chen, J. Hu, P. Perdikaris, W.W. Braham, Adaptive behavior and different 
thermal experiences of real people: A Bayesian neural network approach to thermal 
preference prediction and classification, Build Environ 198 (2021) 107875, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.107875 .
[14] H. Park, D.Y. Park, Prediction of individual thermal comfort based on ensemble 
transfer learning method using wearable and environmental sensors, Build Environ 
207 (2022) 108492, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108492 .
[15] B. Lala, H. Rizk, S.M. Kala, A. Hagishima, Multi-Task Learning for Concurrent 
Prediction of Thermal Comfort, Sensation and Preference in Winters, Buildings 12 
(2022) 750, https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings12060750 .
[16] Y. Bai, K. Liu, Y. Wang, Comparative analysis of thermal preference prediction 
performance in different conditions using ensemble learning models based on 
ASHRAE Comfort Database II, Build. Environ. 223 (2022) 109462, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.buildenv.2022.109462 .
[17] H. Lan, H. (Cynthia) Hou, Z. Gou, A machine learning led investigation to 
understand individual difference and the human-environment interactive effect on 
classroom thermal comfort, Build Environ 236 (2023) 110259. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
buildenv.2023.110259.
[18] X. Feng, E. Bin Zainudin, H.W. Wong, K.J. Tseng, A hybrid ensemble learning 
approach for indoor thermal comfort predictions utilizing the ASHRAE RP-884 
database, Energy Build. 290 (2023) 113083, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enbuild.2023.113083 .
[19] G. Lamberti, R. Boghetti, J.H. K ¨ampf, F. Fantozzi, F. Leccese, G. Salvadori, 
Development and comparison of adaptive data-driven models for thermal comfort 
assessment and control, Total Environ. Res. Themes 8 (2023) 100083, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.totert.2023.100083 .
[20] L. Yang, F. Wang, S. Zhao, S. Gao, H. Yan, Z. Sun, Z. Lian, L. Duanmu, Y. Zhang, 
X. Zhou, B. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Zhai, Comparative analysis of indoor thermal 
environment characteristics and occupants ’ adaptability: Insights from ASHRAE 
RP-884 and the Chinese thermal comfort database, Energy Build 309 (2024) 
114033, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2024.114033 .
[21] K.Y. Park, D.O. Woo, PMV Dimension Reduction Utilizing Feature Selection 
Method: Comparison Study on Machine Learning Models, Energies 16 (5) (2023) 
2419 .
[22] F. Hartwig, B.E. Dearing, Exploratory Data Analysis, No. 16, Sage, 1979 .
[23] C.F. Dormann, J. Elith, S. Bacher, C. Buchmann, G. Carl, G. Carr ´e, J.R.G. Marqu ´ez, 
B. Gruber, B. Lafourcade, P.J. Leit ˜ao, T. Münkemüller, C. McClean, P.E. Osborne, 
B. Reineking, B. Schr ¨oder, A.K. Skidmore, D. Zurell, S. Lautenbach, Collinearity: a 
review of methods to deal with it and a simulation study evaluating their 
performance, Ecography 36 (2013) 27 – 46, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600- 
0587.2012.07348.x .
[24] ISO 7726:1998 Ergonomics of the thermal environment — Instruments for 
measuring physical quantities, 1998. https://www.iso.org/standard/14562.html 
(accessed November 15, 2024).
[25] W.S. Cleveland, A Model for Studying Display Methods of Statistical Graphics, 
J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 2 (1993) 323, https://doi.org/10.2307/1390686 .
[26] L. Breiman, Random Forests. Machine Learning 45 (2001) 5 – 32 .
[27] G. Louppe, Understanding random forests: From theory to practice (Doctoral 
dissertation, Universite de Liege (Belgium)), 2014 .
[28] A.J. Smola, B. Sch ¨olkopf, A tutorial on support vector regression, Stat. Comput. 14 
(2004) 199 – 222 .
[29] L. Breiman, Random Forests, Mach Learn 45 (2001) 5 – 32, https://doi.org/ 
10.1023/A:1010933404324 .
[30] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning, Springer 
New York, New York, NY, 2009. Doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7.
[31] S.M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions, in: 
I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, R. 
Garnett (Eds.), Adv Neural Inf Process Syst, Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. https:// 
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/ 
8a20a8621978632d76c43dfd28b67767-Paper.pdf.
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
21 
[32] S. Ferson, W. Troy Tucker, Sensitivity analysis using probability bounding, Reliab. 
Eng. Syst. Saf. 91 (2006) 1435–1442, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2005.11.052.
[33] J.H. Friedman, Greedy Function Approximation: A Gradient Boosting Machine, 
Annals Statistics 29 (2001), https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013203451.
[34] L. Yang, S. Zhao, Y. Zhai, S. Gao, F. Wang, Z. Lian, R. de Dear, The Chinese thermal 
comfort dataset, Sci. Data 10 (1) (2023) 662 .
[35] B.F. Huang, P.C. Boutros, The parameter sensitivity of random forests, BMC Bioinf. 
17 (2016) 1–13 .
A. Rahmanparast et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applied Thermal Engineering 273 (2025) 126556 
22 
